# Tiny React Ch1 JSX

This series will build a tiny frontend framework, functionally similar to React, to illustrate how React works under the hood. This chapter overs JSX.

I will use Bun as runtime. Node may need extra configuration for typescript and compiling.

## JSX

Now, before we go any deeper, let's look at several important element of react- jsx first.

If you ever took a look at the transpiled code of a React component, you will see that it is just a bunch of function calls. JSX is just a syntactic sugar for `React.createElement`. That is, for exmaple, the following JSX code:

```jsx
const element = <h1 className="greeting">Hello, world!</h1>;
```

Will be transpiled to:

```js
const element = React.createElement(
  'h1',
  {className: 'greeting'},
  'Hello, world!'
);
```

`React.createElement` will create a virtual element, which is another core mechanism. To put it simply, virtual element is the element in virtual DOM. A virtual DOM is something that represents the actual DOM. Since operating on virtual DOM is simply operating js objects, it is much faster than operating on actual DOM. We will talk about virtual DOM in the next chapter. But for now, knowing that JSX is just a syntax sugar for `React.createElement` is enough.

The `React.createElement` function takes the following arguments in order,

1. The tag name of the element. Some tags are special, like `div`, `span`, `h1`, etc. These are called intrinsic elements. Some tags are user-defined components.
2. The props of the element. This is an object that contains the properties of the element. For example, the `className` of the `h1` element above is `greeting`.
3. The children of the element. This can be string or element. Please note that this parameter is represented as `...children` in the function signature, which means that it can take any number of arguments.

It sounds an easy job, right? So let's do it.

## Implement JSX

When it comes to compilation, we can specify the function to use- by default, the function is `React.createElement`. But we can use our own function.

So we create a `v-dom.ts`, so as to define the virtual element first.

```typescript
export type VDomAttributes = { 
    key?: string | number
    [_: string]: string | number | boolean | Function | undefined
}

export interface VDomElement {
  kind: 'element'
  tag: string
  children?: VDomNode[]
  props?: VDomAttributes
  key: string | number | undefined
}

export type VDomNode = 
| string
| VDomElement
```

Please note that we have a `key` field in each node (node is just a name for either text or element). This is for reconciliation, which we will talk about in the next chapter. You can safely ignore it for now.

Now we can implement the `createElement` function. We put it in the same file.

```typescript

export function createElement(tag: string, props: VDomAttributes, ...children: VDomNode[]): VDomElement {
  console.log('createElement', tag, props, children)
    return {
        kind: 'element',
        tag,
        children,
        props,
        key: props?.key ?? undefined
    }
}
```

Now we instruct our compiler to use this function. We can do this by adding the following line to the top of our file.

```typescript
import { createElement as h } from './v-dom'
```

Please note that since we are adopting react standard, we need to introduce the React type definition. We can do this by adding the following line to the top of our file.

```bash
bun i @types/react
```

Then in the `tsconfig.json`, we add the following line to the `compilerOptions` field.

```json
"compilerOptions": {
    "jsx": "react",
    "jsxFactory": "createElement",
}
```

Now, we can take a look at the virtual element we created.

```tsx
import { createElement } from "./v-dom";

function App() {
    return <div>
        <h1>a</h1>
        <h2>b</h2>
    </div>
}

console.log(App());
```

You will see just our defined virtual dom element based on the JSX code.

Furthermore, we can also define a fragment element- the `<></>`, if you don't know its official name. We can do this by adding the following line to the top of our file.

Fragment also needs creation function- it is just a function with different signatures. To support fragment, we need make small changes to our current code. It's very trivial, so I won't account for it here.

```typescript
export type VDomAttributes = { 
    key?: string | number
    [_: string]: string | number | boolean | Function | undefined
}

export interface VDomElement {
  kind: 'element' | 'fragment'
  tag: string
  children?: VDomNode[]
  props?: VDomAttributes
  key: string | number | undefined
}

export type VDomNode = 
| string
| VDomElement

export function createElement(tag: string, props: VDomAttributes, ...children: VDomNode[]): VDomElement {
    console.log('createElement', tag, props, children);
    return {
        kind: tag === '' ? 'fragment' : 'element',
        tag,
        children,
        props: props ?? {},
        key: props?.key ?? undefined
    }
}

export const fragment = ''
```

Extra compiler options,

```json
"jsxFragmentFactory": "fragment"
```

Basically, fragment is just a special element with an empty tag. When it comes to the creation of fragment, the compiler will fetch the `jsxFragmentFactory` and put it into the tag parameter in the first parameter of `createElement`. So we can easily distinguish fragment from other elements.

```tsx
import { createElement, fragment } from "./v-dom";

function App() {
    return <>
        <h1>a</h1>
        <h2>b</h2>
    </>
}

console.log(App());
```

This code will correct yield the virtual DOM. So far, we have implemented the JSX part of our tiny react.
